[Music]
welcome back to psychedelic therapy
Frontiers the podcast devoted to
exploring the frontiers of psychedelic
medicine and what it takes to cultivate
a healthy mind body and spirit as always
psychedelic therapy Frontiers is brought
to you by numinous I'm Dr Steve theer
and today my co-host Dr Reed Robinson
and I are joined by Dr Christopher bash
PhD Chris is a professor of Meritus in
the department of philosophy and
religious studies at Young
State University adjunct faculty at the
California Institute for integral
studies am Meritus fellow at The
Institute of noetic Sciences and on the
advisory Council of GRA Legacy training
he's the author of several books but the
one that prompted us to reach out to him
for this interview is LSD in the mind of
the universe an account of what Chris
experienced and learned from 73
high-doses LSD Journeys that he embarked
on over the course of 20 years in
today's conversation we explore Chris's
LSD session protocol the difference
between using psychedelics for what he
calls cosmological exploration versus
spiritual enlightenment or even
psychological healing talk about how
Chris processed and integrated his very
intense experiences what he learned
about reincarnation Evolution at the
collective and individual levels what
humans need to do to survive the
mounting existential threats we face
what he means by Diamond luminosity and
Diamond soul and of course much much
more Chris's book had a profound impact
on me his disciplined scholarly approach
to psychedelic exploration combined with
his ability to articulate and teach what
for most of us would be an overwhelming
or ineffable experience has resulted in
a must-read in my opinion for anyone who
thinks deeply about questions like who
are we what are we doing here and where
we might go from here if you've ever
listened to an episode of psychedelic
therapy Frontiers and thought to
yourself you know I wonder where I could
find good training on how to use
psychedelics in a clinical practice
well Wonder no longer numinus has
several excellent psychedelic therapy
training programs click on the link in
the show notes or go directly to
numinus hour- trining selection and use
the code ptf1 for 10% off selected
trainings you hear Reed and I talk a lot
about the Psychedelic clinical trial
work that numinus does if you or someone
you know is interested or might be
interested in being a participant in a
psychedelic clinical trial you can click
on the link in the show notes or go
directly to nus.edu.sg
Chris thank you so much for joining us
it's a pleasure to be here with you
today so why don't we just start Chris
by um introducing yourself to our
audience and you can you know share as
much or as little as you'd like just to
give us some
context well I'm a Prof retired
professor of religious studies I made my
living uh teaching in the department of
philosophy and religious studies in
Youngstown State University which is a
State University in Northeast
Ohio so my what brings me to this
program I guess is the book that I
published 3 years ago called LSD in the
mind of the universe which is a strange
book for a professor of religious
studies to have written so my story is
that right at the very beginning of my U
academic career
1978 I just finished my graduate work at
Brown in philosophy of religion and I
met the work of Stan gra and I
immediately recognized that his research
and LS psychedelics in general were
extraordinarily important not just for
Clinical
Psychology uh and for therapy but for
philosophy which was what interested me
the most and so uh I began um even
though it was illegal I began a quiet
private uh psychedelic um practice which
ended up continuing for 20 years I
worked for four years years I then uh
stopped for six years for reasons I
describe in the book and then I worked
for another 10 years and then I spent
another 10 years digest this is from 79
to 99 when I was 50 to 30 to 50 and then
I spent the next 20 years digesting
those experiences trying to absorb them
trying to extrapolate and clarify the
cosmological implications of those
experiences and that's and then I
published uh LSD in the mind of the
universe so that's kind of a brief
sketch of what brings me
here yeah it's and it's and I remember
as I was reading your book I was
thinking what a heroic undertaking and I
don't know if heroic is a word that
lands for you Chris but I mean heroic in
the sense of a hero's journey um the
things you describing the book the
experiences that you had not for the
faint of heart and I've heard you say
that um you don't necessarily recommend
the protocol uh the things that you did
to others and I was curious as to
why well first let me describe the
protocol first everything I did was
within a strict therapeutic protocol I
followed St protocols from his book LSD
Cycle Therapy so traditional is lying
down uh eye shades uh earphones
listening to very carefully uh
choreographed uh music to guide the
session I was always always in private
always protected always with a sitter uh
who was my wife at the time who was a
clinical
psychologist uh
so established in what I call the
Psychedelic Kea and you know a Kaa of
spiritual
practice um for reasons that we can go
into but we don't need to I chose to
work with very high doses of LSD after
about three sessions at 200 50
micrograms I chose to work at 500 to 600
micrograms which is the upper limit it's
it's the body saturation
point
and naively uh I was thinking at the
time that this work was about personal
transformation even personal Spiritual
Awakening and all the spiritual
literature described one's Karma
ultimately as finite even though it may
involve you know causation patterns from
multiple incarnations But ultimately
it's finite so I thought of this
therapeutic work as a process of
clearing the conditioning of my of my
psyche and essentially engaging in
clarifying and purifying Karma and I
thought if I worked with large doses of
LSD I could basically go through this
faster if I could manage the intensity
of the work essentially taking bigger
bites of karma in every session
well I found out down the road that all
those assumptions I was making were
wrong it this work was not about
personal transformation not working at
this High a dose level if you're working
with a gentle or psychedelic or in lower
doses then the activation and the
purification and the healing that would
take place might be constricted or to
personal levels but if you're working
with a a very powerful psychedelic like
this much LSD
uh you basically amplify Consciousness
so deeply that what may have begun as a
personal transformative process becomes
engaged in Collective processes that
having to do with the collective
unconscious the species mind and from
there you're Off to the Races into
deeper and deeper levels of
consciousness cycles of death and
rebirth not just ego death and ego death
is the first of many deaths that you
face on this journey but as you go
through one level of Consciousness after
another
systematically uh you go through many uh
forms of death that are more foreign
perhaps than ego death uh so that's
that's why I I don't recommend the
protocol uh because it's an extremely
demanding
protocol uh it it takes a lot of it it
basically becomes a center FOC focus of
much of your life just to engage these
deep states to navigate them to absorb
them and integrate them into your life
and integrate them into your your social
life and into your body if and I
also I thought that there was an end
point to this journey you know one of my
false assumptions was the reason for
doing this work was to get somewhere you
to get to Enlightenment or to become one
with God or to enter into the Primal
void of existence and I had all of those
experiences and I discovered that there
were many levels of divinity that one
can enter into communion with and there
were even many levels of the of the pure
void of the Fertile
void and about oh 15 years into my
experience I had a particular experience
when I was as deep into the universe as
I would ever go deep into what I call
the diamond Luminosity domain and I had
an experience that I saw reality far far
into the distance which and the beam of
light hit me from that
reality and it shattered me uh it it
just shattered me and I was in a very
high and subtle State of Consciousness
and that's when I
realized uh it's an infinite Journey
you'll never get to the end of the
universe the universe is just too vast
the depth of the vinity is just so great
so now that if I were to start this
journey over again I would be much
gentler with myself I'd work with gentle
I balance low dose high dose organic
psych psychedelic synthetic psychedelics
because now I understand that the real
goal of this work is to open yourself to
let in as much of the love and
intelligence and wisdom of the universe
as you can into your system and then to
digest it and hold on to it and and draw
it into your life and let it guide you
and it's not about getting um to some
Final
Destination that's uh beautiful Chris
thank you for for sharing I'm so many
questions come up but one thing um I
wanted to ask along those lines is um
what do you think the risks are of going
straight to those higher um deep States
uh going to the higher Doses and perhaps
bypassing some of the the healing work
or the lower dose work is there a little
more you can share on um how you might
use those two different uh dose ranges
as
tools
yeah well first of all any work with
psychedelics especially if you're
working with higher doses uh in a
therapeutic protocol any work with Psych
delics uh can be challenging and
therefore calls for good psychological
screening uh to make sure that you have
a psyche that's ready to engage these
deep levels uh as you know there are
some people who should never go near
psyched psychedelics and there are some
people who should really work very
gently uh with psychedelics if they work
with psychedelics at all I happen to
have a constitution
that
uh can become large or can flow into
expansive States pretty readily and
congeal pretty readily and smoothly at
the end of the day not everybody is
wired like that and so it's you know all
the cautions have to be taken all the
clinical you know criteria have to be
met for this type of work
now if you work with high doses you can
bypass I mean you can get into
situations where you can chase a
particular level of experience and
bypass but that wasn't that didn't
happen to me it wasn't part of my work
uh I spent the first 10 sessions and two
and a half years in very grueling kind
of work with in what Stan calls the
parin level level of Consciousness the
interface between your personal
unconscious and um the collective or
transp personal
Consciousness so it's you know you're
you're reliving your birth you're
dealing with all sorts of existential
crisis you're really grinding things
very deeply at that
level now I I will say that late in my
sessions rather late I
mean 15 years down the road I mean there
was lots of personal healing that took
place along the way don't get me wrong
there were personal healings that took
place in those first 10 sessions
and other down the road often they would
take place at the beginning and ending
of my sessions if I when I was
leaving SpaceTime and when I was coming
back into SpaceTime because when I was
working in the peak of the sessions
after about you know the first two or
three years of work I was working in
States Of Consciousness that
were far beyond my personal
Consciousness and far beyond SpaceTime
even
so but along the way you know packaged
around the areas there was lots of
healing of different parts um and late
in the
sessions there was some very quick uh
healings of pieces of my life and I
think if I had been working with lower
doses those healings would have taken
place
earlier but I found that in my
particular instance I don't think it was
because I was jump jumping over any
problems or I was not willing to
confront any problems because the things
you
confront at the Deep levels of the
psyche are much much more severe than
anything that you confront at the
personal level of the psyche and I want
to say that you know I came into this
work I wasn't carrying any personal
trauma I had a a pretty easy start in
life I had good parents good good home
environment nothing more than the
ordinary
pushpull uh in a family and so there
wasn't a deep wound that I took into
this work other than the deeper wound is
really the wounds that everybody every
human being carries when they enter time
and space that is the wound of
stabilizing within time and space and
understanding why we are here what is
the whole purpose my existence uh in
this domain and uh can I can I discover
what my reason for being here is and can
I enter into communion with the
intelligence that I believe saturates
all existence so in my particular case
what I found was that
um and I have to say this carefully for
someone who doesn't know my work it may
sound grandiose and I apologize for that
but
I found
that my personal wounds were not kind of
healed until late in my work because it
was my personal wounds that anchored me
in the larger fields of Consciousness in
such a way that it allowed me to
accomplish or to be used to accomplish
some of the healing of the collective
psyche that took place in my work that
is I it's like the way I describe it in
the book my personal wound anchored one
side of a bridge and the other side of
the bridge was the collective
psyche and by having that bridge when I
went deep into awareness Consciousness
it
allowed my sessions to become a conduit
to pull some of the pain of the
collective
psyche out of the collective psyche and
to trans
torment and if my personal wounds had
been healed early on U that ability to
do that would have been
compromised and what I learned along the
way is that this function this specific
function
to engage the collective psyche in a way
to bring a certain measure of healing to
it was part of my soul's work it was
something that I kind of signed up for
in this Incarnation and I think
personally I think there are a lot of
people who are doing this type of work
and have signed up for this type of work
I don't think there's anything special
or unusual about my choice to do this
work it is uh uh from our perspective a
very brave hero's journey as as Steve
mentioned earlier when we were chatting
but but I'm also curious about that
disposition you mentioned um because it
uh comes into play in
um people we work with and a lot of
questions we get how much of it do you
think is uh nature versus nurture how
much can you cultivate as an ability to
expand uh and hold those states without
you know shattering into overwhelm or um
getting
discombobulated um wondering if you have
some thoughts on
that I'm I'm sure you I mean I I know we
can learn how to enter these states more
skill y uh some people have a natural
aptitude for moving into them but
whatever the level of aptitude is uh we
practice in these states and we enter
into them carefully and if you enter
carefully and process carefully and
debrief carefully we can learn how to
enter these states better in future in
future sessions I really think uh
integration and very careful debrief
careful recording of your session after
it's over process ing it really sitting
with the content of it is really
important because it establishes the
Baseline for your next entry into your
non-ordinary state and so it's like a
cycle and integrating your work as you
go is really important to the next step
in your work now I I want to mention
that in my work um particularly since it
was being a it was being driven by such
highly Amplified States Of Consciousness
in my work I kept as many variables
stable as possible so for all these
sessions I worked in the same set and
setting same substance same dose same
sitter uh same recording process even
the same part of the country because any
of these variables can change some of
the texture and and that's not bad to
change the texture but by standardizing
the variables I think it created a
container which allowed my conversation
with the universe and my communion with
the universe to progressively deepen
deep get deeper and deeper over time so
by stabilizing the content the contact
zone of contact that I made with the
universe it allowed the deepening to
take place now of
course what kind of communication or
contact we have with the universe partly
depends upon the Headroom of the
Psychedelic that we're using and all
psychedelics uh you know psilocybin ioan
um MDMA 5meodmt LSD they all have
certain qualities of how they engage
Consciousness and they have a certain
Spectrum a range of of
engaging and I think one of the reasons
I kept breaking through over 20 years
one level of consciousness after another
had to do with holding the posture uh
holding the setting but also with the
sheer power of the Psychedelic that I
was using if I had been working with a
psilocybin I'm sure my experiences would
have overlaped a great deal but I don't
think it would have had as much head
cosmological head roomm uh as working
with LSD
did and how did your uh your wife then
feel about the trip sitting Duty that's
uh kudos to her on the dedication for
that role as well was it hard to hard to
uh convince her to do that or was she
kind of with you in this purpose of the
the philosophical
Adventure Carol did this out of love for
me uh she was never particularly drawn
to working with psychedelics um they
were too much too fast in her opinion
she is a a deeply spiritual
person and uh we eventually after 24
years of marriage we
separated and she has G we're friends
and we stay in contact with each other
and with our children particularly
around our children she has gone on to
complete her three-year three Monon
Retreat uh in the vadana tradition so
she's a serious practitioner and she has
a a deep spiritual orientation it's been
it's lifelong and it was a tremendous
value to me to have her spiritual wisdom
grounding me while I entered into this
work but it was never her work and she
did it because she knew I wanted to do
it and we always supported each other uh
in our spiritual
paths that's really neat now thanks for
sharing all
this yeah Chris I'm I'm really
captivated by the the the very science
scientific like approach that you took
or at least a very careful and
deliberate and disciplined approach and
the way I imagine it is by controlling
for those variables you were able to
return to maybe the same drill site and
just sort of augur down and get this
very very deep core sample of the cosmos
you know a very very deep core sample of
the universe and you know as it
manifested in you and you manifested in
it as opposed to what some Psychonauts
or people who are approaching
psychedelics for therapeutic or
spiritual exploration purposes do where
they just sort of Pock Mark the Surface
by not paying close attention to set and
setting or they're experimenting with
many different types of of
substances yeah yeah I think that's I
think that's true there of course
there's no right or wrong way to use
psychedelics there are so many ways of
using them and um many good ways of
using them so I just happen to represent
one particular strategy I was trained as
philosopher of religion I have a natural
orientation towards precision and
Analysis and so particularly since I
wasn't didn't fully know what I was
getting into I wanted to leave
breadcrumbs in case I needed to work my
way back out again uh it turns out that
was a that was not a a needed
concern
um I'm sorry I'm losing my train of
thought here a little bit well no I I
have a I guess I a follow-up question
here Chris because as a trained
philosopher of religion I I think I've
read um if not in the book it might have
been in the postcript uh that you wrote
for Paradigm explorer that um you know
you when you started approaching this
work you might have described yourself
as an agnostic sort of atheist leaning
agnostic um and I'm curious to hear how
your belief in or relationship to the
Divine changed if at all as a result of
your uh experience
with this substance and this
protocol well you know basically through
all The Graduate Studies and I went
through uh I basically studied my way
out of religion entirely and out of
theism and out of any belief in the
Divinity as I had learned it by studying
world religions and the history of
Theology and philosophy and so I began
this work as as not just an agnostic but
an atheistic I Ally inclined agnostic
was like okay you going to put up or
shut up on this one because right now
it's it it doesn't look good I mean my
the whole I think science has just gone
through and wiped out
anything that any thing that smacks of
traditional religion because the god of
the religions of the axial age that
deity is just too small for the universe
that science is showing us is is here
just the massive scale and scope and
intelligence of it and the you know it's
just I think it just erased the
Blackboard and we're still catching up
with this erased Blackboard so I brought
a mind that was not adverse to religion
but was adverse to theology in a way
and but when you begin to have
experiences of the reality that the
religions have been talking about well
that changes everything very quickly
uh so that when one goes does this work
and you go through cycles of death and
rebirth and you go through this process
of of losing your reality or or
surrendering your reality as you have
known it inside time and space and you
go through a death of that reality and a
rebirth you wake up in another level of
reality another dimension of existence
and you do that again and again in a
systematic
way then the reality of
uh the reality of a reality beyond space
and time just becomes overwhelmingly
clear and true to you and your ability
to understand it and to uh absorb it and
to taste it uh
becomes second
nature now
in all the years I did this work and all
the levels of consciousness I went
through I never encountered anything
that might be recognized as a deity or
even a personal spiritual guide which is
pretty common in many shamanic
Traditions but I always felt myself to
be engaging an
intelligence that was essentially
guiding my experiences or or kind of
feeding these experiences to me in an
interactive participatory
Manner and this this Consciousness
boundaries of this Consciousness kept
deepening the deeper my practice
went um in that
context I could speak about God but I
don't really like to because God has so
many connotations in the west that I'm
not comfortable with and you I could
speak about Divine divinity but that's
just kind of smuggling in you know
through a side door so I tend to speak
about the creative intelligence of the
Universe um because it's in one way a
way of understanding the scale and scope
of what I actually experienced is to
understand that the Universe has a
mind the and actually the universe
arises out of a mind it arises out of a
Consciousness and it's always sustained
and nurtur nurtured by a more
fundamental reality which you can call
it
spiritual uh you can call it dark energy
dark matter you know but now we know
that 96% of the universe is invisible
Dark Energy Dark Matter so it's not that
radical to sort of suggest that there is
a reality behind physical
reality
um I think all our historical concepts
of God have been
profoundly incomplete in
inadequate and we are entering a period
of History where we're basically going
to be
rewriting that story and I think
psychedelics have an important role to
play because it lets ordinary Mortals in
a way it just ordinary late people have
firsthand contact with this vast expanse
of spiritual reality
that gives you experiences that you know
are the kind of experiences that
previously and in earlier Generations
people would have described as the
experience of
God so Chris who who are we in this
story you know are we as others have
stated are we sort of this this you know
unique organization of of molecules that
is the universe experiencing itself this
each one of us a fractal you know that
where the gets to Joy in experiencing
itself in a way that wouldn't have
otherwise like what what do you think we
are I think you say it pretty well uh I
think you know this that question has so
many levels to it and it depends on how
we want to frame it going in uh we are
clearly part of the creative uh
experiment that the universe is we are
we are an aspect of it we're not
separated from it we are our nature our
body the cells of our biology arise out
of this evolutionary
Masterpiece um and our mind just as our
body derives from the universe our mind
derives from the universe now I know in
our period of History we're we're taught
that the universe is a machine and it it
moves with the machine's blindness and
it's evolves through random mutation and
genetic mutation and Rand of variation
and screening by a necessity but that's
just a story that we've told and it's
not been a bad story but it's a
profoundly incomplete story because when
you when you sink down into the depths
of your mind you drop eventually out of
your mind into deeper layers of Mind
into the species mind into the you know
a solar system or Galactic mind and as
you drop down into that you engage you
you find yourself confronting or being
dissolved into an
intelligence that is just stunningly
vast I mean it's just a massive
intelligence and a depth of love and
compassion that's behind that
intelligence and and it's this
intelligence which is
manifesting the universe that we
experience it's manif testing itself as
the universe and we are fortunate enough
to be cells within this body of divine
self-manifestation fractally embedded in
it so that our story is part of its
story its story is part of our story now
that's at what one level and then at a
deeper level if we add reincarnation
into it and of course that's an assumed
in my worldview not because of Faith but
because of the empirical evidence that
we have amassed at this point in time my
first book was on
reincarnation and I think that's just
part of how nature functions we don't
really know how it came to function this
way but nature has found a way to fold
learning forward not only at the species
level in an EV in a broad species
evolutionary sense but it's found a way
to fold individual learning forward in a
way that I think reincarnation is simp
higher Octave of
evolution and once we add evolu
reincarnation into the story once we
understand that we are participants in
this evolving Universe for not just a
hundred years but for 100,000 years then
the plot really thickens then we're
looking at the universe is in intensely
involved in manifesting galaxies solar
systems
planets life self-aware life and then
evolving reincarnating life that puts us
on some type
of profound co- footing with Creation
with existence so that we really are our
Evolution and its Evolution are really
part of the same fabric human
evolution individual evolution they're
really two different aspects of the same
process so if you'll permit me Chris to
just keep pulling on this thread because
it's one that's fascinated me and
preoccupied me frankly for my entire
life I mean um this notion of who we are
in relation to the universe what is the
what is Divinity um because when you
when we're preoccupied with the m what
feels like the mundan you know mundane
of daily life pain or taxes going to
work that kind of thing um and we think
of ourselves as this as I said before
sort of this fractal uh piece of what
you describe as this practically
infinite intelligence the substrate of
which is sounds like his love um it it
it causes me to think like well so are
we have we always existed in some way
shape or form as an individualized
intelligence related to this gr this
grander one because when you talk about
reincarnation it makes me wonder like
was there is there some continuity to
Steve faer that goes back hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of years that I
just
don't remember right or is it each time
we're we're deconstructed to our
constituent parts and reassembled with
new parts and and it's just sort of
pieces that move forward in time what
what do you think yeah Welly you know we
don't know the answers to all the all
the answers to those questions uh we
don't really know how reincarnation
works we don't know what the physics of
reincarnation is even if we have evid
evidence that reincarnation is a fact of
nature we don't know the of it how it
goes how it works but it seems to be
that the universe is a learning
system and reincarnation is a part of a
learning
system
so because our Consciousness did not
begin with our body uh but our
Consciousness goes back farther we can
use a concept like Soul some type of
concept that holds and gathers the
learning from all of the incarnations
we've
experienced how far back does it go two
questions how far back does it go right
and the answer is nobody knows for sure
but all the cultures that have believed
in reincarnation say it doesn't start
with human beings it starts before human
beings how far before human beings well
we're not really sure now my sense is
that it's it starts when individuality
begins to emerge within the evolutionary
Matrix and I'll use the term evolution
frequently as you know as you've heard
but that and I believe in the concept of
progressive development a progressive
unfolding but that doesn't mean I agree
with the kind of standard textbook
theory of what's driving reincarnation
so when I use the term EV Evolution I
don't mean that theory uh that reductive
determinist Theory
H it's about
learning how far back does it
go somewhere along the way between
grasses and
chimpanzees it's hard to think of
individual Blades of grass having
individual Consciousness we usually
think in terms of broad classes but
somewhere in the evolutionary process an
individuality emerges
and as that individuality emerges
there's a learning that deepens that
individuality over time and that's when
I think reincarnation becomes
possible classically they look to
animals that are uh
well lowered down the mamalian change
but somewhere around in somewhere in the
animal life form but wherever it emerges
the next question is what are we
underneath these evolving changes and I
think the answer to that is you have to
get that takes us down into a deeper
level underneath the soul and we ask
well what is the essence of the Soul
what is the essence of our
individuality what's the essence that
makes this evolving individuality
possible and there I think we we find
the same answers in psychedelic work
that we find in the classic mystical
traditions classic High spiritual
traditions and that is the essence of
the individual is the essence of the
Divine the essence of the one is the
essence of the totality we are in
essence derived from the Divine Sparks
of the Divine we've been sort of teased
out of the unitive Matrix of the
Divinity and been given the privilege of
individuated existence which then is
polished and refined and deepen over
thousands and thousands and thousands of
years of going back and forth between
spirit and matter spirit and matter
spirit and matter taking us onto a
developmental process but the essence of
what we are is the Divine itself the
manifestation of what we are depends
upon how long we've been
cooking that's uh fascinating and how
you mentioned Karma earlier uh how you
viewed it going into this work and
suggested that maybe it changed but
wondering how you view Karma now in this
uh in this broad perspective that you've
been
sharing it's simply as cause and effect
you know it's karma of aaka cause and
effect uh it's simply make and it course
the universe pulses with cause and
effect right at all of its levels but
here we're simply talking about a
substrate of cause and effect the causes
that are set in motion by the exercise
of our capacity to choose we make
choices we inherit the consequences of
those choices in that new context we
make new choices and then we inherit the
consequences of those choices so if
we've been smoking uh two packs of
cigarettes every day for 5 years we're
not free to not want that next cigarette
but we are free to begin to set in
motion a series of choices that can free
us from that addiction to those
cigarettes so we're constantly making
choices we inherit the consequences of
those
choices one of the ways in which my
thinking has changed over the years
since writing life cycles my first book
Is that I have a much deeper
appreciation of the uh synergistic
relationship between
individual development or individual
Karma and Collective development or
Collective Karma I think that we have a
tendency in the west to overp
personalize the concept of Karma to
really kind of tell the story of the
individual soul maturing over many
lifetimes and reaching Enlightenment or
whatever and I
think these our species is evolving
pulsing every hundred years right in
reincarnation and there is a a
collective learning process taking place
which our individual learning process is
part of and so the boundary between
collective learning and individual
learning uh is porous and I have much
more respect or sensitivity to the
collective Karma that I had might have
previously seen as personal Karma yeah
wow and um earlier you mentioned the Ro
psychedelics might be playing in this
kind of evolution of Consciousness these
days and when we were talking about that
place between Blades of grass and
chimpanzees I'm wondering what your
thoughts are on Terrence McKenna's like
stoned ape hypothesis and if that was an
example of the universe uh um between
spirit and matter learning as it evolved
and uh if you viewed psychedelics as
playing a role in history as
well terrence's hypothesis there is
interesting isn't it yeah uh and I don't
have I don't have an opinion on that I I
don't have uh any particular any new
insights to add to that I hold it as an
interesting
hypothesis um I don't have any individ
any independent way of assessing that
yeah um so I just don't know now I do
think
that we are coming to a turning point in
history we are coming to a make or break
point in
history um
and I think that uh psychedelics have a
significant role to play uh and they're
giving us extra awareness at a time when
we desperately need extra awareness they
also are giving us a form of accelerated
and deepening healing at a time when we
desperately need accelerated and
deepening healing because I think that
there is a tremendous inter fermentation
process taking place a tremendous
detoxification taking place at the
collective level as well as an
individual level and it ex it manifests
itself in our individual lives in terms
of this kind of more uprush of uh
content of karmic content of
conditioning of pain and Trauma that
we've been carrying in our Soul history
uh but I think this is happening not
just to a few select individuals who are
middle class able to attend to this but
it's happening underneath us in our
social movements and underneath the
World At Large and I think
psychedelics by giving us an amplified
experience of our Consciousness and our
Consciousness and the Consciousness that
we are part of it not only helps us heal
and helps us manage this purif ation
process but it also gives us a wider
worldview which it only takes you know a
one good deep psychedelic experience of
communion with the Deep structure of the
universe to shatter materialism the
philosophy of that matter is the only
thing that's real um I think Houston
Smith was right that a mystical
experience does not a Mystic make but a
mystical experience
can an atheist
unmake you know and I think psychedelics
have a very important role to play in
that now how far can will this
go how deep will psychedelic healing
reach in our culture how fast would
these insights realized under
psychedelic
communion change or contribute to the
paradigm shift that's taking place which
is being driven by multiple disciplines
right now I don't know uh but it seems
that you know the fact that LSD was
invented the same decade that the
nuclear bomb was invented and the
nuclear bomb has
changed the order of of Global Order uh
I think is may be sign significant
synchronicity So speaking of this time
in human development and is somebody who
has really dedicated his academic and
personal life to exploring what it means
to be human I'm curious to know if you
have an opinion on artificial
intelligence you know some some folks
who uh talk about the way psychedelics
are helping us learn who we are um might
be really really important given that we
might be creating something that is
different but also conscious I'm curious
to know if you have an opinion
yeah you know I don't really have an
opinion uh PE I it has not come up in
any of my sessions I you know I finished
my sessions in
1999 artificial intelligence never came
up in my
sessions uh I stand on the sidelines as
a lay person and kind of an old lay
person I'm 74 years old and and this is
really a younger generation's work and I
watch what's happening in artificial
intelligence work just from the edges
and I can see that it's developing much
faster than I could possibly keep track
of personally I'm concerned about it but
clearly it's here it's happening now
it's it's going to have huge impact on
us in the future I don't know what what
role it will play whether it will be a
friend or an enemy uh over time I'm more
concerned about the ecological Cliff
that we're going over because this is
very we can extrapolate and we are
getting a clear and Clear Vision of how
the imbalances that we have generated in
the industrial era are beginning to
manifest with catastrophic
consequences and the cumulative effect
of a these ecological crises which are
going to keep hitting again and again
until we get on top of this and we're
not anywhere near to beginning to get on
top of it uh this is turning the 21st
century I think
into uh a
tremendous A Century of tremendous
Global instability and Global unraveling
and
crisis so that to me has been kind of
focal point in my thinking how
artificial intelligence plays into this
I don't know and on the E ecological
front uh how much of that uh realization
of uh the problems that we Face how much
of that came from these psychedelic deep
Dives and and or how much of it is just
from kind of your experience in life and
did you get any insights any any ways
you think psychedelics or the expansion
of awareness or raising
Consciousness uh might help us in our uh
in a better path
forward well let's hold the second part
of that question of how psychedelics
might help us in a better path forward
and let me address the first part of it
um because this was one of the biggest
surprises of my of my work I mean first
I had to let go of the framing of my
work as personal Journey personal
transformation personal healing personal
Awakening Spiritual
Awakening get involved in a much larger
dance with the uh species mind with the
collective
unconscious being catapulted from there
into levels of archetypal reality and
then being catapulted into deeper causal
levels of reality and so I say this
just a mark that I understand that what
I'm about to say about human where we
are and where we're going
historically will sound outrageous and
they will sound highly
speculative but when you my experience
is very simply when you work very very
deeply way under far underneath the
personal psyche dropping
into uh the collective psyche and into
the creative intent
underlying uh Evolution the evolution of
our species these things come naturally
into
Focus uh in a way
which make perfect sense from a Quantum
Paradigm or a post neonian atomistic
materialist Paradigm
so there's a chapter in
LSD in the mind of the future and the
universe which I is the birth of the
future human and it's a chapter where I
gathered together all the experiences
that took place in my journey that bear
on this question where is Humanity now
and where are we going and it was one of
the complete surprises to me that this
came up in my sessions and this was a
long this is a long time ago before I
had any ecological awareness you know
before I had absorbed information that
we're all absorbing today these Visions
took place between 1991 and
1995 so you know a long time ago I was
completely naive about
uh hitting our environmental limits
hitting our ecological Limits The Crisis
that was building in our
culture what began to happen is tucked
in around the edges here and there I
began to be given
visions of where Humanity was in its
evolutionary Saga I began to be given
visions that we were coming to a turning
point a definitive turning point in
human history an evolutionary pivot I
began to be given visions that we are
entering a magnificent period of human
history where there was just tremendous
blessings coming to us a period of
profound
transformation that the future of
humanity would be radically unlike its
present and its past and there was some
fundamental process that we were
undergoing that was taking us there but
for the first three or four years of
this I was given these consistent
visions of a of a future but was given
no indication of how we would actually
get there how was nature going to pull
off because you look around us it
doesn't look very positive I mean you
know more people are at the shopping
mall than they are in transformative
weekend
workshops uh violence is
escalating how how are we going to make
this transition and then in 1995 in
December of
95 when I was very far along in my
psychedelic work I had entered a stage
of work that I call the diamond
Luminosity material so I was halfway
through uh years of work in this very
subtle exquisitly Sublime Diamond
Luminosity work and in the middle of
that in a rhythm when I was expecting to
be taken back into the diamond
Luminosity instead I was dissolved into
the species mind so and in that context
s the
species I went through a process or I
experienced a death and Rebirth of the
Human
family I experience a profound
unraveling of Life as we had known it a
profound
challenging it's hard to describe this
because most of our experiences we
experience from within a
self-referential point and and it it
sounds ludicrous to just say I describ
the death of humanity as Humanity but I
experienced this tremendous building
crisis in the world and the unraveling
of people's lives and the shattering of
expectations and the shattering of
systems until eventually Humanity was
reduced to the bare challenge of
survival just bare survival it was so
deep it looked for a while like it was
going to be an Extinction event it was a
Global Systems crisis which appeared to
be driven by a cascading series of EOC
crises I wasn't given any details beyond
that I wasn't given any timetable I
wasn't given any sense of the how this
would
happen I was just taken into this deep
cultural Collective crisis and then just
when it was at its worst we seemed to
move through this crisis
and when we began to pick ourselves up
on the other side of this crisis we had
been changed by this crisis we had been
changed radically they had taken place
an opening of the human heart an opening
of compassion a profound change in human
we would say classically in human nature
I would describe it as a shift in the
fundamental structure of the collective
unconscious what we're looking at is
what you might think of it as a shift in
the plate tectonics of the collective
psyche when we move through this crisis
as we began to reassemble ourselves the
entire world was saturated with new
values new perceptions of the good new
social institutions this was a huge
transformation of the human heart and
then I was given many instructions on
the mechanisms how we would make through
this make it through this crisis faster
than we would think possible give given
the pace at which history moves and it
has to do with understanding the
function of the collective psyche as a
field the the you know this is going on
maybe a little long but the synopsis is
that the collective psyche is a unified
field and this crisis will be so severe
it will shove
not only individual psyches into a
non-equilibrium into an highly altered
state but it'll shove the collective
psyche of humanity into a
non-equilibrium or far from equilibrium
condition we have a certain knowledge
about how physical systems when they are
shoved into a non-equilibrium state
behave we've learned this from Chaos
Theory a number of different
areas there is a sense in which I was
shown that the human psyche when shoved
into a similar non-equilibrium state
will exhibit some of the same
characteristics the capacity for Rapid
change the emergence of new structures
emerging from the floor of the
collective psyche that small iterations
small changes can produce dramatic
outcomes the N the bottom line of this
is that we were going to be moving
through this crisis much faster than we
would think possible because of the
severity and the negative impact this
crisis was going to be having on lives
all around the
world subsequent sessions in the Years
following I was given the experience
moving into deep time again and moving
beyond linear
time experiencing what I call the future
human experiencing the archetypal form
of
humanity
and I experienc this
being this being is an extraordinarily
beautiful being just a magnificent being
this being is in some ways as far beyond
us as we are beyond our earlier Homo
erectus uh cousins uh a being with a
massive heart a healed heart an open
mind and not just a a transformation of
our heart and a transformation of our
mind that opens up all sorts of
possibilities but actually a
transformation of our sensory experience
we tend to have a mechanical
understanding of our theory about how
senses
work but I was shown I was given the
experience that the more Consciousness
is Consolidated in our body the more
refined our exper our sensory
experiences can become and so I had an
experience at the very end of my journey
of my vision aund times sharper than it
is an ordinary Consciousness and so the
same applies to our hearing and all our
other senses so this is a pivot of a
radically transformed human species of a
radically opened heart radically open
mind and a radically
augmented physical
capacity right so I think this is the
story of the Century this is the story
of the century that we're all dealing
with is how do we make this transition
how do we make this
pivot from our present condition into uh
our next evolutionary form and this is
what I call the birth of the diamond
soul but I'll stop here and give you a
chance to ask any questions well one uh
followup question on that last note but
I definitely want to get into the birth
of the the Diamond soul but do any of as
a professor of religious studies and um
I'm just wondering if any of the the
ways
um certain religions or philosophies
view this um line up with what you're
describing I'm thinking in particular of
say the Cali Yuga uh from Hinduism and
you know thousands of years ago the
beginning of this Dark Age and
materialism and Corruption and the the
ancient sages or Rishi kind of retreat
into the the Himalayas or wherever but
haven't disappeared entirely and then
kind of that the turn of this age into
the golden age or SATA youa you have the
return of wisdom intelligence compassion
uh and I'm wondering if if any of those
um line up or if you apply any
Frameworks to help understand this from
from your other
studies in addition to the ones you
mentioned we have a number of Hy
Prophecies of course uh there are a
number of indigenous cultures uh that
have been seeing this profound
transformation had been talking about it
for a long long time uh and it's it's
interesting and and it dust line up uh I
think the general perception is that we
are we are in a period of Darkness but I
I would conceptualize that Darkness as a
period in which the conditioning of the
past
which is you know kind of the karmic
patterns which shape the human psyche at
Deep structural
levels we're entering a period of
infusion of Grace and infusion of energy
which is
driving driving this past to the surface
of our psyche so we can deal with it all
the hatreds of History the divisions
which we've carved in the human psyche
which we've carved on the planet the the
divisions of race the divisions of
gender the divisions of nationality the
divisions of halves and Have Nots this
all the patterns of splitting the world
between in these categories are being
driven to the surface and they're all
these toxicities are coming out of us
and have to come out of us in order to
make make us available to the influx of
the Divine energy which is entering and
you can think of it as entering us from
above or coming up within us underneath
but I think there there's something
deeply true about these ancient
prophecies that we we are in a sense in
the age of the
kuga and uh we are coming into a
profound new
age when it will hit us when we how we
will get there I don't know uh but I
think there's a relation between these
prophecies it is something that's feels
is I hear you talk about it Chris it's
something that does feel very true when
I as a psychologist you know I've been
very curious about the human psyche and
kind of like the questions I asked
earlier about who we are have always uh
been on my mind because when I look at
the human organism I see a being that is
capable of so much more than we
currently tend to produce that is a
capable of great violence that is
capable of fear and and terrible
behaviors that are based on fear but
also capable of great creativity and
adaptation and love and inclusion and
compassion were such a paradox and I and
as terrifying as it sounds the things
that you describe this sort of maturity
process this next next stage of
development it does sound necessary that
we would need some kind of Crisis to I
don't know if the right word is force or
Draw out this next stage of our
development um and I look at at my own
psychedelic experiences and those of my
clients and others that I've read about
as almost an exercise in exist potential
crisis right it's almost like going
through a Refiner's Fire to to kind of
burn away the dross so that the purity
of what you really are can come forward
but I but back to our conversation about
integration I think because of how
intense that can be and how confusing it
can be it can be really hard to make use
of in sort of our imminent life right
day-to-day
life yeah it can it really can um what
happens I think is that once we get into
this work deeply we suddenly realize
we're playing on a different playing
field than we had thought we were
playing on before uh and it's a lot it's
a much bigger game that's a foot and and
it's not about our own personal life and
personal transformation but we are
involved in historic processes of
enormous import and so if you're going
to engage the Deep psyche you're kind of
going into the deep end of the pool
you're you're going into the deep water
and theep deep water is moving very fast
right now and there's a tremendous kind
of a bubbling taking
place and everybody has a a certain
tolerance for being able to handle the
complexity and the
intensity of what's taking place at that
very deep level so when we come back we
we need to not only record as carefully
as we can what is the nature of our
Visionary experience but then we really
have to take care of ourselves as we try
to integrate those experiences I'll tell
you that it took me a year to recover
from that experence that session I told
you about uh the birth of the future
human that collapse the death and
Rebirth of humanity it took me about a
year to really recover from that and to
sort of stabilize that and even then I
mean for for the years that I've held
that vision
you really have to practice the Arts of
grounding if you're going to go deep you
better be well grounded uh in all levels
physically emotionally
psychologically and socially uh with
your peer groups because it's a
demanding process that we're involved in
now my sense is before my understanding
of how reincarnate ation works is we get
to choose the life that we incarnate in
we we are given a certain set of options
of of and we sought of see what we're
going into if we choose the lives that
we're going into and that means I think
that every person here on this planet
has chosen to be here in the form that
they are and that means that all of us
have chosen to Incarnate at this very
demanding time in history we want to to
be a player in this demanding time in
history from a spiritual
perspective well let me I'm I'm back up
be careful on this I don't want to go
too far too fast but I think we
all knew what we were getting into when
we
incarnated and we chose to be part of
this process for our benefit for the
benefit of our children and our
grandchildren all around the world and
for the de for the benefit of the Divine
itself because uh the Divine is working
I mean this is not something humanity is
doing this is something nature is doing
and whatever the intelligence is that
lies behind and within nature that it's
doing you know this has always been a
question I've had about this notion of
choosing to Incarnate and if if you'd
rather not go down this path we don't
have to Chris but um you know the idea
that uh somebody would choose to to
Incarnate um as as a baby born with
fetal alcohol syndrome or somebody would
choose to Incarnate as a kid who was
born the last year uh in some War torn
country or or a place where there was a
lot of disease and conflict um yeah
again if you'd rather not try to tackle
that it's okay I know there are some
things we just don't have answers to but
how does how does a a reincarnation
perspective grapple with those realities
yeah yeah in just terrible terrible
suffering babies born without brain
without neocortex and enolic children
babies are born into violent
circumstances destined to
die after a very short life life with
terrible pain how can we possibly
comp assert that there is intelligence
let alone
compassion behind in such a universe and
I think in order to see the wisdom and
to see the intelligence we have to look
very deep we have to look deep and we
have to look wide because on the surface
life is a mean son of a and life
is cruel and vindictive and it's just
filled it's decimated by
by circumstances that just crush the
human
heart from a reincarnational
perspective the awareness is that life
did not our life did not begin with
birth and our life does not end at death
that our life is part of a larger
story why one would choose someone would
choose a life that involves so much
suffering is a maybe an impossible
question to answer from within inside a
time space perspective and from within
an
individual homocentric perspective
in order to perhaps Glimpse some of the
larger patterns of life we really have
to open up into a very large perspective
an evolutionary perspective a spiritual
perspective the important I think the
most important thing to be aware or to
understand is
that all of our suffering is preser is
conserved and used and it's all of our
suffering all human suffering is
experienced by the Divine there is no
Divine outside of human suffering
watching us suffering doing something
that's making it possible or not
possible but everything that Humanity
suffers everything that the animal
kingdom suffers the spiritual World
suffers um at a very deep level
so uh yeah I mean if we are the as we
talked about before the universe
experiencing itself it's not just the
people with awesome lives that the
universe is experiencing right it's
every instantiation of the universe
every life the ones that suffer and the
ones that don't suffer as much and I you
know and I address this in in life
cycles human
suffering brings us to our knees and I
don't think we have an adequate
understanding or explanation of
it in my
experience when I have been drawn into
this larger overview
and when I have experienced the
intelligence behind of this process I
have found myself trusting beyond what I
can understand and I trust because of
the quality of the of the being that I
encounter that's behind these
circumstances so I can't understand all
the pain behind all this and I can I
have I can come up with any number of
kind of partial and incomplete theories
for how this stuff works or how it goes
but in the end I think we're ultimately
brought to our knees in trying to
understand it
intellectually but if you experience the
love and wisdom of the
universe
then it gives us confidence that there
truly is a logic to it and now I want to
say I want to the universe is a hard
Taskmaster and you know if when you look
at pictures of kie the
Destroyer uh you know and she's a
liberator of of brings about
Enlightenment but she brings death and
destruction in one hand and
Enlightenment of the other these things
go together there is nothing easy or
gentle about the love of the universe of
the love of the Divine it is a fierce
fierce place that we are part of it's a
very very demanding world but the
question is does the universe in a
deeper sense is it paying ATT attention
to our pain is it is there a way in
which by engaging our pain as
conscientiously as we can does it lead
to our own development in the long term
and is the universe listening to us as
we are in pain and I think it is I think
it is a an intentional process even
though I can't answer your question
satisfactorily well it was a beautiful
answer and I really appreciate you
taking it uh and and trying to answer
that question Chris cuz I certainly feel
like I'm on my knees and I think I've
read somewhere maybe this was you or or
someone else but that the Divine as
you've described it is something that we
can experience but not necessarily
comprehend and that concept has actually
brought me quite a bit of Peace as
somebody who's you know a self-described
truth Seeker really really wanting to
understand things thinking that that
would give me some kind of um assurance
that everything would be okay or uh help
me understand what I should do or
shouldn't do you know kind of a typical
um experience of somebody who's looking
for for the answers so permission to not
know all the answers is quite
comforting yeah and Chris do you have uh
um
certain uh people you count as teachers
or um like your philosophical and
spiritual um perspective and and
leanings now I'm thinking of that
question that you know I hope we can get
into next of how does one uh proceed on
a path of exploration like this wisely
um what are good Preparatory um you know
philosophies and spiritual Frameworks
and systems to to check out or try on
perhaps
yeah well I had the benefit of being a
professor of religious studies and so I
spent a lot of my life my professional
life um teaching courses in um
comparative mysticism in Buddhism uh in
you know introductory courses and
Eastern traditions and Western
traditions and so I got to study a lot
of the Masters and uh learn their
stories and they were always my kind of
guidepost the great Masters the great
Spiritual Beings were
always even though my work was not
focused on Spiritual Awakening we
haven't talked too much about that but
still the great Masters were my
touchstones and I tried to hold myself
accountable to
them um as I conducted myself in this
unusual spiritual
practice I indigenous cultures I have
tremendous respect for I have not
academically studied them I have a you
know kind of a Layman's reading of a
number of books and respect for
them uh and I really appreciate that
people who are undertaking this type of
work it's very beneficial to do it under
the toage of an experienced teacher of a
guide of someone who can help them
process what they're
experiencing that hasn't been my
particular Destiny my particular work
I've never had uh a teacher uh I've
never been G advised by an elder in a
psychedelic community in this way the
only teacher that I've personally had
has been the universe itself and and she
has been a Fierce and a loyal uh uh
teacher she's broken me down ground me
up spit me out and beat me severely and
she's also held me and blessed me and
loved me and taught me more things than
I ever imagined were
possible when we do this type type of
work uh it's foolish to do it alone
these were my circumstances and I had
the Constitution to survive it and I had
the companionship of my partner who was
a very wise spiritual woman who helped
keep me grounded and I had the advice of
the elders that I was studying in my
courses for most people when we do this
work it's do it's good to do this work
in groups it's good to do this work
under the guidance of someone who has
more experience in these states than we
do because this is a new territory and
uh and and when I say A guidance I don't
me someone who's guiding our experiences
but someone who can help us enter these
states safely and someone who can help
us understand and process the our
experiences when we come back out of
that and I think it's important to have
people that we can talk to this was one
of the burdens of my particular Journey
MH and that because I was working in
isolation because it was all illegal uh
I could not bring it to the office I
could not bring it to campus I could not
talk to my students about it I'm a
teacher I love to learn and share and
I'm a
gabber so I could not talk about this
stuff and that's not a healthy way to be
it's good to have community that you can
share your experiences with and that you
can listen to other people's experiences
and as that experience grows we know
that We're All in This Together We
really learn from each other as we going
deeper into this so I think it's really
important uh to do this work in a
responsible way with uh the guidance or
tutelage of people who have more
experience at it than you
do yeah oh thank you for that and and I
know uh time is whizzing by as it tends
to do but I'm just on the edge of my
seat dying to know if there's anything
you could share about the birth of the
diamond Soul or however you put it or
that second part of the uh the kind of
evolution and Ecology of Consciousness
or or where we might focus our
intentions on a path forward
yeah well about halfway through my
journey in the 38th session in a a year
of great blessings of just enormous
blessings I was taken on experience that
was
preceded with some very very intense
purification processes very intense
death rebirth
process and at one phase in this
journey I had the experience of all my
former lives coming into me I mean I had
done past life therapy before I was
familiar with about a dozen of my past
lives I'd already written the book on
reincarnation so I was comfortable with
the idea of
reincarnation but I began to experience
my former lives coming into me and it
was like winding a a string around a
kite's
pool and what happened is they seemed to
hit a critical mass and when they hit a
critical mass they fused and there was
there was an explosion of energy and all
of these Separate Lives fused into one
life there was an explosion of diamond
light out of my chest and I was
catapulted into a state of consciousness
that was beyond anything I had realized
up to that point in
time I was an individual but an
individual Beyond any frame of reference
that I had known before and I came and
then I was given a whole lot of
teachings and over and over again so
that I would understand what was
happening and this came to
be it changed my whole understanding of
how reincarnation works and where it's
taking
us the classic understanding of
reincarnation in eastern cultures is
that you know you incarnate you make
some Pro you self challenge you make
mistakes you make progress but basically
you get better and better stronger and
stronger more compassionate over time
until eventually you reach some type of
spiritual realization some Awakening
experience Enlightenment experience and
once you reach that then you're free to
leave the system of SpaceTime so it's an
up andout cosmology and all the
religions of the aial age of last 5,000
years they're all up and out cosmologies
so you achieve salvation and then or you
achieve enlightenment and then the
fruition comes in an off-planet
spiritual
Paradise my experience in my sessions
the teaching I received in my sessions
is that that is not an adequate
description of what's Happening that's a
first stage approximation that Humanity
made when they began to have sufficient
depth of experiences that they began to
have contact with spiritual reality they
began to understand
reincarnation but it's stopping
halfway I think the what I was shown in
in my experiences was that
humanity is not simply evolving one
lifetime after a lifetime after a
lifetime making small incremental
improvements and our quality of the
Soul's existence sooner or later I mean
we sooner or later all of our Lives come
together inside our physical existence
now we die we expand into the soul we
incarnate into our narrow egoic
experience we die incarnate in the soul
we incarnate in individual lifetime we
know the soul in between our lifetimes
but if we keep this incarnational Rhythm
up long
enough and I have my students sometimes
do this as an exercise for 15 minutes
we're doing this each lifetime expanding
out sooner or
later the soul wakes up inside our
physical existence and this is what I
call the birth of the diamond
Soul when the soul wakes up inside our
physical existence not only is there a
tremendous expansion of our heart and
mind but it changes our entire
orientation it it it we focus on the
long-term Vision the long term good the
wide good because we have in a sense an
intuitive awareness of all the hundreds
of people thousands of people we've been
in relationship with through
history we have been every race we've
been every religion through time we've
been up and down the economic ladder
we've had all the roles in history
possible that when all those lives come
together and wake up into a singular
Consciousness it radically changes one's
perceptive perception of what's taking
place who we are and where we're
going I think this when people ask what
form will the future human take and
we're exploring this with all sorts of
Science Fiction you know what the form
of the future human will be but I think
it's really much more simple than that
we have been developing and gestating
the future human for hundreds of
thousands of years
reincarnation we've been gestating the
future human through reincarnation for
hundreds of thousands of years gestation
is
long labor is short and
intense I think we are entering a period
of history of Labor and I think we are
desperately trying to grow into the
largest deepest richest version of
ourselves and that is the diamond soul I
think the diamond soul is being born in
history
the diamond soul is the form that the
future human would take and imagine if
the entire species went through this
process not just a few Christ and the
Buddha and Muhammad and a few Saints
privileged here and there but if the
entire species went through this
transition that they awaken spiritually
to this deeper identity that's been
gestating inside of them all these
years what a what an extraordinary
species that would be and what would
that species what an extraordinary
history that species would create I
think we've reached a point in history
where we simply cannot run this planet
out of egoic Consciousness we either
grow up or we go
extinct and Extinction is a tremendous
evolutionary
accelerator so I think we are
personally I think this crisis evolving
this century is going to take us to our
Edge but my
experiences that we do make it through
this crisis I've I've experienced the
future human as a task to be actualized
and also an accomplishment that has
already been realized so from my
personal perspective I deeply believe
that we will make it through this crisis
we will make it through the
developmental
challenges and when we do and we're
looking back over human history and our
individual soul history we will
recognize that everything all the pain
we suffered all the hardship that we
went through to get to this place it's
been worth it it's been worth it we're
giving birth to a new child in history
and it will be worth
it Chris I am finding myself feeling
very grateful to you for your life's
work for your willingness to share it
I'm glad that you decided to to come
forward and um share with you know all
of us not just your students that you
had to you know do so almost covertly
just by living the difference but also
now through your written work through
coming on podcasts like ours um it means
a lot to me personally and I'm just so
grateful for your your willingness to
come on our
show it's an honor to have this
discussion with you gentlemen uh and
it's an honor to share uh uh these ideas
and this teaching uh with your audience
it truly is
thank you Chris this uh this has been
such a a delightful honor and pleasure
so um we'll we'll cherish this
conversation thank you for your
generosity in sharing with
us thank you for your work gentlemen
thank you for the healing you bring into
the world and the insight you're
bringing into the world and Chris is
there anywhere in particular you'd like
to to point people a website um any of
your current work where can they find
out more about
you uh they can contact me through my
website Chris bash.com it's a website in
need of an overhaul but it's there uh
and I have posted you know things I've
written there and uh but you know I'm
All Over YouTube various podcasts and
talks I've given her on
YouTube um they can find if the if the
Articles or things that I've written are
not on my website they will be on uh
academia.edu under my name there all my
articles are published there so all the
most important things that I've written
are available and they can reach me on
my website I'm not doing any structured
teaching at present I may be doing some
retreats in the near future uh but those
are still in the planning stages right
now I'm just doing uh some talks here
and there at
conferences um maybe some Retreats being
coordinated by some of the people I've
been working Within individually uh
but basically I'm just following the
work out into the world I really don't
have I really don't have an agenda right
now I'm responding to where the book
takes me people read the book they get
interested like you and uh I'm just
following it out well a Cris bash
Retreat sounds awesome I'll put it on my
bucket list and I I'll be looking for it
and we'll link to your website and and
places where people can find your work
in our on our episode show notes again
thank you so much
Chris you thank
you psychedelic therapy Frontiers is
brought to you by numinus a mental
wellness company committed to tackling
the global Mental Health crisis by
delivering best-in-class psychedelic
assisted therapies contributing to the
body of primary and clinical psychedelic
research and fostering healing through
Community Connection and social
responsibility you can learn more about
numinus at luminous.com that's n m
n.com if you enjoyed the show today and
you want to support us here's how you do
it rate and review the show on platforms
like apple podcast and Spotify subscribe
to the numinous YouTube channel like the
videos and share it share the show or
clips of the show with someone that you
think will enjoy
it the content of this podcast does not
constitute medical advice or mental
health treatment consult with a medical
or mental health professional if you
believe you are in need of mental health
treatment